This README_RNAseq_Google_HG002_PacBio.md was generated on 2023-06-06 by Ummey Jannat.

------------------- 
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------

**Title of Dataset**\
HG002 PacBio IsoSeq generated by Novogen contracted work by Google.

**Principal Investigator**\
Justin M. Zook\
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)\
Email: jzook@nist.gov

**Dataset Contact(s)**\
Nathan D. Olson\
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)\
Email: nolson@nist.gov

Andrew Carroll\
Institution: Google\
Email: awcarroll@google.com

**Date of data collection**\
2022-01

**Background**\
PacBio IsoSeq by Novogene on RNA from the HG002 cell line as part of the 
NIST-GIAB RNAseq pilot sequencing project.

**Usage**\
PacBio HiFi subreads, raw input for consensus basecalling to generate HiFi basecalls.

**Limitations**\
[Discuss any known limitations of the data being described by
README. e.g. data is incomplete, assumptions that were made, exclusions, known
issues, etc.]

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
--------------------------

**Licenses/restrictions placed on the data, or limitations of reuse**\
See NIST license and data use policy at the end of the document.

**Recommended citation for the data**\
[Provide citation with DOI]

**Links to other publicly accessible locations of the data**\
Links to publicly accessible locations of the data:

- NIH hosted GIAB ftp site: ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ReferenceSamples/giab/data_RNAseq/AshkenazimTrio/HG002_NA24385_son/Google_PacBio
- SRA: TODO 

--------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
--------------------
 
```
.
└── reads
    ├── HG002.m64284e_220110_074143.subreads.bam 
    └── HG002.m64284e_220110_074143.subreads.bam_md5sum
```


**File Naming Convention**\
Files are named according to the PacBio movie naming convention. `HG002.[instrument id]_[YYMMDD]_[time].subreads.bam`

**File Descriptions**
- `*.subreads.bam`: raw HiFi subreads, used as input for consensus basecalling.

--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------
<!-- 
Methodological information and QC summaries are from https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ZhfLjjRJwb0Kx7vsKg80n-ddjWHW5vZ5/view?usp=sharing
 -->
1. Total RNA QC

All samples are assessed before library construction:

    (1) Nanodrop: to check RNA purity (OD260/OD280).
    (2) Agarose Gel Electrophoresis: to check RNA degradation and potential contamination.
    (3) Qubit: to accurately quantify RNA concentration.

2. Library preparation and sequencing

The PacBio Sequel Systems are used for SMRT sequencing. Generally Speaking, Iso-Seq SMRTbell® libraries are usually constructed with or without size selection to detect full-length transcripts. Without size selection, the full-length isoforms detected up to 4 kb. A non-size selected Iso-Seq experiment is usually recommended to better understand the diversity of transcripts in the samples. However, size selection of transcripts allows the detection of isoforms up to 10 kb. To increase the sequencing yield of >4 kb transcripts, pooling a non-size selected Iso-Seq library with a size selected Iso-Seq library for sequencing on the Sequel System is a better choice. The procedure of library construction is as follows:

    (1) After total RNA QC, mRNA is enriched using oligo (dT) beads.
    (2) The first strand cDNA is synthesized using the Clontech SMARTer PCR cDNA Synthesis Kit. The CDS Primer IIA anneals to the polyA+ tail of transcripts, followed by first-strand synthesis with SMARTScribeTM Reverse Transcriptase.
    (3) The first-strand product is diluted with Elution Buffer (EB) to an appropriate volume and subsequently used for large-scale PCR amplification.
    (4) After cDNA amplification, a portion of product is used directly as a non-size selected SMRTbell library. In parallel, the rest of amplification is first selected using either BluePippin or SageELF, and then used to construct a size-selected SMRTbell library after size fractionation.
    (5) DNA damage and ends are then repaired, followed by hairpin adaptor ligation. Now cDNAs are transformed into circularized molecules, SMRTbell templates.
    (6) Finally, sequencing primers and polymerase are annealed to SMRTbell templates.

3. Raw Data Processing and Data Statistics

By means of SMRT, the original sequenced data will contain the information of non, or one, or over two templates and the subsequent analysis results may be affected by the multiple information. The software SMRTlink was used to filter and process original sequenced data, with minLength=0, minReadScore=0.8 as parameters.

**Quality Assurance**\
Subreads summary
NA24143_H5	498.604	173813736	2868	3049

--------------------------
DATA USE POLICY
--------------------------

This software was developed by employees of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), an agency of the Federal Government and is being made
available as a public service. Pursuant to title 17 United States Code Section
105, works of NIST employees are not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. This software may be subject to foreign copyright. Permission in
the United States and in foreign countries, to the extent that NIST may hold
copyright, to use, copy, modify, create derivative works, and distribute this
software and its documentation without fee is hereby granted on a non-exclusive
basis, provided that this notice and disclaimer of warranty appears in all
copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS' WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
EXPRESSED, IMPLIED, OR STATUTORY, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTY
THAT THE SOFTWARE WILL CONFORM TO SPECIFICATIONS, ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND FREEDOM FROM
INFRINGEMENT, AND ANY WARRANTY THAT THE DOCUMENTATION WILL CONFORM TO THE
SOFTWARE, OR ANY WARRANTY THAT THE SOFTWARE WILL BE ERROR FREE. IN NO EVENT
SHALL NIST BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, SPECIAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, ARISING OUT OF, RESULTING FROM, OR
IN ANY WAY CONNECTED WITH THIS SOFTWARE, WHETHER OR NOT BASED UPON WARRANTY,
CONTRACT, TORT, OR OTHERWISE, WHETHER OR NOT INJURY WAS SUSTAINED BY PERSONS OR
PROPERTY OR OTHERWISE, AND WHETHER OR NOT LOSS WAS SUSTAINED FROM, OR AROSE OUT
OF THE RESULTS OF, OR USE OF, THE SOFTWARE OR SERVICES PROVIDED HEREUNDER.

