This README_RNAseq_Mason_HG004_ONT.md was generated on 2023-07-28 by Nate Olson.

GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------

**Title of Dataset**\
HG004 ONT direct RNA sequencing by the Mason Lab at Weill Cornell Medicine.

**Principal Investigator**\
Justin M. Zook\
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)\
Email: <jzook@nist.gov>

**Dataset Contact(s)**\
Nathan D. Olson\
Institution: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)\
Email: <nolson@nist.gov>

Chris Mason\
Institution: Weill Cornell Medicine\
Email: <chm2042@med.cornell.edu>

**Date of data collection**\
2023-05-26

**Background**\
ONT direct RNA sequencing on the PromethION by the Mason Lab at Weill Cornell Medicine
 of the HG004 cell line as part of the NIST-GIAB RNAseq pilot sequencing project.

**Usage**\
Fastq and Bam files can be used with any transcriptomic pipeline developed for nanopore
 long read seqeuncing data for seqeuncing reads and alignments respectively.

SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
--------------------------

**Licenses/restrictions placed on the data, or limitations of reuse**\
See NIST license and data use policy at the end of the document.

**Recommended citation for the data**\
Manuscript in development

**Links to other publicly accessible locations of the data**\
Links to publicly accessible locations of the data:

- NIH hosted GIAB ftp site: ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ReferenceSamples/giab/data_RNAseq/AshkenazimTrio/HG004_NA24143_mother/Mason_ONT-directRNA
- SRA: Will update when submitted

DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
--------------------

```text
.
├── alignments
│   ├── HG004_GM24143_directRNA_ONT_Mason_20230526.sorted.bam
│   └── HG004_GM24143_directRNA_ONT_Mason_20230526.sorted.bam.bai
├── checksum.md5
└── reads
    ├── HG004_GM24143_directRNA_ONT_Mason_20230526.fastq.gz
    ├── HG004_GM24143_directRNA_ONT_Mason_20230526_sample_sheet.csv
    └── HG004_GM24143_directRNA_ONT_Mason_20230526_sequencing_summary.txt.gz

2 directories, 6 files
```

**File Naming Convention**\
`[GIAB ID]_[CELL LINE ID]_[library type]_[sequencing tech]_[sequencing lab]_[sequencing date].{fastq.gz|sequencing_summary.txt.gz|bam|bai}`

**File Descriptions**\

- `*.fastq.gz`: basecall files in gzipped compressed fastq file format
- `*sequencing_summary.txt.gz`: gzip compressed sequencing summary files generated by the Guppy basecaller.
- `*sample_sheet.csv`: table with sequencing run metadata, including the flowcell id and type
- `*bam`: alignment file
- `*bam`: alignment index file

METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------

Total RNA was isolated utilizing the SQK-RNA002 direct-RNA kit (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) Notably, the protocol includes a spike-in calibration RNA sequence (see below). Basecalling was performed with Guppy version 6.4.6, utilizing the built-in high-accuracy model at 70 bps.

`calibration.fasta`

```text
>YHR174W ENO2 SGDID:S000001217, Chr VIII from 451327-452640, Genome Release 64-2-1, Verified ORF, "Enolase II, a phosphopyruvate hydratase; catalyzes conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate during glycolysis and the reverse reaction during gluconeogenesis; expression induced in response to glucose; ENO2 has a paralog, ENO1, that arose from the whole genome duplication"
ATGGCTGTCTCTAAAGTTTACGCTAGATCCGTCTACGACTCCCGTGGTAACCCAACCGTCGAAGTCGAATTAACCACCGAAAAGGGTGTTTTCAGATCCATTGTTCCATCTGGTGCCTCCACCGGTGTCCACGAAGCTTTGGAAATGAGAGATGAAGACAAATCCAAGTGGATGGGTAAGGGTGTTATGAACGCTGTCAACAACGTCAACAACGTCATTGCTGCTGCTTTCGTCAAGGCCAACCTAGATGTTAAGGACCAAAAGGCCGTCGATGACTTCTTGTTGTCTTTGGATGGTACCGCCAACAAGTCCAAGTTGGGTGCTAACGCTATCTTGGGTGTCTCCATGGCCGCTGCTAGAGCCGCTGCTGCTGAAAAGAACGTCCCATTGTACCAACATTTGGCTGACTTGTCTAAGTCCAAGACCTCTCCATACGTTTTGCCAGTTCCATTCTTGAACGTTTTGAACGGTGGTTCCCACGCTGGTGGTGCTTTGGCTTTGCAAGAATTCATGATTGCTCCAACTGGTGCTAAGACCTTCGCTGAAGCCATGAGAATTGGTTCCGAAGTTTACCACAACTTGAAGTCTTTGACCAAGAAGAGATACGGTGCTTCTGCCGGTAACGTCGGTGACGAAGGTGGTGTTGCTCCAAACATTCAAACCGCTGAAGAAGCTTTGGACTTGATTGTTGACGCTATCAAGGCTGCTGGTCACGACGGTAAGGTCAAGATCGGTTTGGACTGTGCTTCCTCTGAATTCTTCAAGGACGGTAAGTACGACTTGGACTTCAAGAACCCAGAATCTGACAAATCCAAGTGGTTGACTGGTGTCGAATTAGCTGACATGTACCACTCCTTGATGAAGAGATACCCAATTGTCTCCATCGAAGATCCATTTGCTGAAGATGACTGGGAAGCTTGGTCTCACTTCTTCAAGACCGCTGGTATCCAAATTGTTGCTGATGACTTGACTGTCACCAACCCAGCTAGAATTGCTACCGCCATCGAAAAGAAGGCTGCTGACGCTTTGTTGTTGAAGGTTAACCAAATCGGTACCTTGTCTGAATCCATCAAGGCTGCTCAAGACTCTTTCGCTGCCAACTGGGGTGTTATGGTTTCCCACAGATCTGGTGAAACTGAAGACACTTTCATTGCTGACTTGGTTGTCGGTTTGAGAACTGGTCAAATCAAGACTGGTGCTCCAGCTAGATCCGAAAGATTGGCTAAGTTGAACCAATTGTTGAGAATCGAAGAAGAATTGGGTGACAAGGCTGTCTACGCCGGTGAAAACTTCCACCACGGTGACAAGTTGTAA
```

Basecalled reads were aligned to the masked version of [GRCh38](https://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ReferenceSamples/giab/release/references/GRCh38/GCA_000001405.15_GRCh38_no_alt_analysis_set_maskedGRC_exclusions_v2.fasta.gz) <https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.07.18.500506v2> using
 Minimap2 version 2.26-r1175 with the following command.

```bash
minimap2 -ax splice -t 16 -uf -k14 {REF} {FASTQ}
```

DATA USE POLICY
--------------------------

This data/work was created by employees of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), an agency of the Federal Government. Pursuant to title 17 United States Code Section 105, works of NIST employees are not subject to copyright protection in the United States.  This data/work may be subject to foreign copyright.

The data/work is provided by NIST as a public service and is expressly provided “AS IS.” NIST MAKES NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT AND DATA ACCURACY. NIST does not warrant or make any representations regarding the use of the data or the results thereof, including but not limited to the correctness, accuracy, reliability or usefulness of the data. NIST SHALL NOT BE LIABLE AND YOU HEREBY RELEASE NIST FROM LIABILITY FOR ANY INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, SPECIAL, OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF BUSINESS PROFITS, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION, LOSS OF BUSINESS INFORMATION, AND THE LIKE), WHETHER ARISING IN TORT, CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM OR RELATING TO THE DATA (OR THE USE OF OR INABILITY TO USE THIS DATA), EVEN IF NIST HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

To the extent that NIST may hold copyright in countries other than the United States, you are hereby granted the non-exclusive irrevocable and unconditional right to print, publish, prepare derivative works and distribute the NIST data, in any medium, or authorize others to do so on your behalf, on a royalty-free basis throughout the world.

You may improve, modify, and create derivative works of the data or any portion of the data, and you may copy and distribute such modifications or works. Modified works should carry a notice stating that you changed the data and should note the date and nature of any such change. Please explicitly acknowledge the National Institute of Standards and Technology as the source of the data:  Data citation recommendations are provided at https://www.nist.gov/open/license.

Permission to use this data is contingent upon your acceptance of the terms of this agreement and upon your providing appropriate acknowledgments of NIST’s creation of the data/work.
